# ESM Network meeting: poster

## Abstract
There are two common timeframes which ESM items refer to: the present moment (i.e., momentary) or a specific time interval in the past (i.e., retrospective). In a lag-one vector autoregressive model, the contemporaneous relations between variables are often of interest to researchers. When momentary and retrospective items are measured at the same prompt, modelling the undirected contemporaneous relations between them as correlated residuals is conceptually insufficient because the two types of items are actually asynchronous. This approach cannot test the potential causal effect which the retrospective item has on the momentary item, which could hamper the forming of valid causal inferences, an important goal for ESM research in clinical psychology. 

In the current study, we explore another approach of modelling the directed contemporaneous effect by estimating the unidirectional path from the retrospective item to the momentary item instead of their correlated residuals. Based on data from a single-case study where momentary positive affect and retrospective physical activity were measured at an interval of 3 hours during the daytime, we compare the predictive accuracy of the two approaches using cross-validation techniques. Results suggest that the two approaches perform highly similarly in terms of model fit and predictive accuracy. Therefore, we recommend that researchers consider the more theory-driven approach of modelling the unidirectional contemporaneous effect in relevant future applications.
